Add best practices for `applies_to` (#1614)
elastic/docs-builder: docs/contribute/cumulative-docs/example-scenarios.md

Reviewer: missing patterns:
* terminology changes (likely we would use a note for this - [here's an example with no versioning](https://www.elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/security/network-security))
* behavioral changes of a feature (often need to pair old/new behavior using bullets or headings, but might want to put old behavior in a note to make it "secondary") - common in settings ([example 1](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/elasticsearch/jvm-settings#heap-dump-path-setting), example 2 [pr](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/131728) [page](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/dense-vector), [example where content needed to be refactored](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/131707))

some of these currently use prose because of the component limitations

% we say to treat Stack/Serverless and deployment types differently.
% Should we?
## Section applicability differs from page applicability [page-section-varies]

When a section has different applicability than the applicability indicated at the
page level in the frontmatter, use section-level `applies_to` badges.

### If labeling deployment modes [one-section]

For example, the content on the [Security](https://www.elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/security) page is generally applicable to all deployment types, but the first section only applies to Elastic Cloud Hosted and Serverless:

* In the frontmatter, specify that the content on the page applies to all deployment types unless otherwise specified.
* In a section-level annotation, specify that the content only applies to `ech` and `serverless`.

:::::{tab-set}
::::{tab-item} Image
:::{image} ./images/example-one-section.png
:screenshot:
:alt:
:::
::::
::::{tab-item} Code
````
---
applies_to:
  deployment: all
---

# Security

[...]

## Managed security in Elastic Cloud

```{applies_to}
deployment:
  ech: ga
serverless: ga
```

[...]
````
::::
:::::

:::{warning}
**Don’t overload with exclusions unless it is necessary.**

> % FOR THE REVIEWER: IS THIS TRUE?

Author: Captured in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/208

In this example, we expect the reader to understand that in sections where only some deployment types are listed,
the content is only applicable to the deployment types listed in the section-level annotation
(and is _not_ applicable to the deployment types that are listed at the page level,
but are omitted from section-level annotation).
:::

:::{tip}
Likewise, when the difference is specific to just one paragraph or list item, the same rules apply.
Just the syntax slightly differs so that it stays inline: `` {applies_to}`ech: ga` {applies_to}`serverless: ga` ``.
:::

### If labeling serverless and stateful [not-one-section]

For example, if a whole page is generally applicable to Elastic Stack 9.0.0 and to Serverless, but one specific section isn’t applicable to Serverless. The content on the [Spaces](https://www.elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/manage-spaces) page is generally applicable to both Serverless and stateful, but one section only applies stateful:

* In the frontmatter, specify that the content on the page applies to both unless otherwise specified.

% FOR THE REVIEWER: WHICH IS CORRECT?
% The existing docs and the "real" example in the wild use different strategies.

> % Do we include `stack: ga` in the section annotation or not?

Reviewer: I vote for the standalone `unavailable` (calling out differences only) but this is not a problem that arises for me much so open to the will of the people

> % Do we include `stack: ga` in the section annotation or not?

Reviewer 2: I feel like this is something docs-builder should own for us. With the goal of minimal tagging required from a writer standpoint translating to clear, consistent tagging on built pages. Some thoughts on this topic in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/205.

> % Do we include `stack: ga` in the section annotation or not?

Reviewer: would like them to only learn how to write once and have us own the debt of this (i.e. the guidelines should not change for this as our tech changes)

> % Do we include `stack: ga` in the section annotation or not?

Reviewer 2: Good point. In that case, I would vote for exactly what you proposed, only adding a standalone `unavailable`.

> % Do we include `stack: ga` in the section annotation or not?

Reviewer 3: Fine for me as default approach and see from there

> % Do we include `stack: ga` in the section annotation or not?

Author: Captured in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/208

```{applies_to}
stack: ga
serverless: unavailable
```
````
::::
:::::

:::{tip}
Likewise, when the difference is specific to just one paragraph or list item, the same rules apply.
Just the syntax slightly differs so that it stays inline: `` {applies_to}`serverless: unavailable` ``.
:::

## Functionality is added to an unversioned product [unversioned-added]

When functionality is _first added_ to an unversioned product/deployment mode,
how it is labeled depends on if the functionality is in technical preview, beta, or GA.

### If the section lifecycle is the same as the page level [unversioned-added-same]

% FOR THE REVIEWER: IS THERE AN EXAMPLE?
% I actually couldn't find an example where unversioned content was added
% without also adding content for a versioned product.
For example, on the [<page>](#) page we added content about new <something> functionality that was added to Serverless in GA.
Since the page's frontmatter already includes `serverless: ga`, there is no need to label the added content.

:::::{tab-set}
::::{tab-item} Image
% :::{image} ./images/
% :screenshot:
% :alt:
% :::
::::
::::{tab-item} Code
::::
:::::

> % FOR THE REVIEWER: IS THIS TRUE?

Reviewer 4: Are we talking about potentially adding a serverless badge under the [Elastic Observability Serverless project features](https://www.elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/project-settings#obs-serverless-project-features) heading? I feel like it's pretty clear here because the entire page is serverless GA and serverless is mentioned in the section itself, maybe in mixed docs it could be more complicated, but i would think it would only make sense if the content differed from the rest of the page.

> % FOR THE REVIEWER: IS THIS TRUE?

Reviewer 3: No it's for cases where there's both stack and serverless: if something changes say in 9.2 and we must add a new sentence/item/section, is it best to just put the stack badge, or is it clearer if both stack and serverless badges are shown.

So for the case you're describing there wouldn't be a badge to add.

::::::{important}
However, if the functionality is also applicable to a specific version of a versioned product/deployment mode,
label the content with both versioned and unversioned applicability information.

For example, on the [Lens](https://www.elastic.co/docs/explore-analyze/visualize/lens) page we added information
about a new option that was added to Serverless in GA and the Elastic Stack in GA in 9.1.0.
Even though it is added to Serverless, an unversioned product, in the same lifecycle state as the page-level annotation,
we still include an inline annotation to make it clear that this is not only available in the Elastic Stack.

:::::{tab-set}
::::{tab-item} Image
:::{image} ./images/example-unversioned-added-same-exception.png
:screenshot:
:alt:
:::
::::
::::{tab-item} Code
```
---
applies_to:
  stack: ga
  serverless: ga
---

# Lens [lens]

[...]

#### Tables

**Density** {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1` {applies_to}`serverless: ga`
:   Make the table more or less compact. Choose between **Compact**, **Normal** (default), and **Expanded**.
```
::::
:::::
::::::

### If the section lifecycle is different than the page level

> % FOR THE REVIEWER: IS THERE AN EXAMPLE?
> % I actually couldn't find an example of this scenario.
> For example, on the [<page>](#) page we added content about new <something> functionality that was added to Serverless in preview.
> Since this is different than the page-level applicability in the frontmatter, `serverless: ga`,
> label the content about the new functionality with `serverless: preview`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, on the [Dashboard controls](https://www.elastic.co/docs/explore-analyze/dashboards/add-controls#add-esql-control) page we added content about new ES|QL controls functionality that was added to Serverless in preview.
Since this is different than the page-level applicability in the frontmatter, `serverless: ga`,
label the content about the new functionality with `serverless: preview`.
```
This is also about the stack in addition to serverless but I guess it still demonstrates the point

[Configure advanced settings](https://www.elastic.co/docs/solutions/security/get-started/configure-advanced-settings)
page from the Elastic Stack in 9.1.0 and from Serverless around the same time.
Since this this functionality is still available before 9.1.0, we need that content to continue to be
available to users on Elastic Stack earlier versions while communicating to users on newer versions
that it is no longer available.

:::::{tab-set}
::::{tab-item} Image
:::{image} ./images/example-removed-unversioned-exception.png
:screenshot:
:alt:
:::
::::
::::{tab-item} Code
````
---
applies_to:
  stack: all
  serverless:
    security: all
---

# Configure advanced settings [security-advanced-settings]

[...]

## Access the event analyzer and Session View from the event or alert details flyout [visualizations-in-flyout]

```{applies_to}
stack: removed 9.1
serverless: removed
```

[...]
````
::::
:::::

::::::{important}
If the functionality was only ever available in an unversioned product or deployment mode,
remove the content altogether.

% FOR THE REVIEWER: IS THERE AN EXAMPLE?

> % I couldn't find an actual example of this scenario.

Reviewer 3: Not sure we've had this case yet

**Example**: On the [Enable audit logging](https://www.elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/security/logging-configuration/enabling-audit-logs#enable-audit-logging-procedure) page, we use tabs to show separate ordered lists outlining the workflow for each deployment type.

::::{image} ./images/example-workflow-tabs.png
:screenshot:
::::

### Solution C: Use sibling pages [workflow-sibling-pages]

Sibling pages are a last resort when no other solutions are appropriate.

**When to use sibling pages**:

* Neither [inline `applies_to` badges](#workflow-inline) or [tabs](#workflow-tabs) are appropriate.
* The workflow has significant differences across multiple procedures.
* There are chained procedures where not all of the procedures are needed for all contexts
  or where the flow across procedures is muddied when versioning context is added.
* The workflow exists in a very complex page that is already heavily using tabs and other tools we use for versioning differences.
  This makes it difficult to add another “layer” of content.
* Product lifecycle state changes like when technical preview or beta transitions to GA.

**Best practices**:

> * When using this strategy for product lifecycle changes: hide the earlier page and cross-link between the two so the more stable GA doc is more prominent, but the earlier version is still available to users who need it.

Reviewer 3: Are we sure this is how we want to do this?

An option could be to specify the version in the page title, and have the several pages live next to each other, or older versions as subpages of the latest.

I'm just really not sure about hiding the pages.

Reviewer 3: I'd say cut it for now

**Example**: We use separate pages for ECH and Serverless billing information:

* [Cloud Hosted deployment billing dimensions](https://elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/cloud-organization/billing/cloud-hosted-deployment-billing-dimensions)
* [{{serverless-short}} project billing dimensions](https://elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/cloud-organization/billing/serverless-project-billing-dimensions)

> ## Screenshots vary [screenshot]
> 
> Sometimes the UI differs between versions, deployment types or other conditions.
> 
> ### Solution A: Use tabs [screenshot-tabs]
> 
> **When to use tabs**:
> * When the screenshot shows significantly different interfaces or workflows for each product, deployment type, or version.
> * When the screenshot represents a specific, interactive action, like clicking a button or navigating a UI that changes meaningfully between contexts.
> 
> **Best practices**:
> * Keep any explanatory text outside the tab unless it's specific to the screenshot inside.
> 
> **Example**: As of the Elastic Stack 9.1.0 release, there are no examples of this approach being used in live docs
> except for with images used in workflows.
> 
> ### Solution B: Add a note [screenshot-note]
> 
> In cases where only a small visual detail differs (for example, a button label or icon), it’s often more efficient to add a note rather than creating tabbed screenshots.
> 
> **When to use a note**:
> * When the screenshot is mostly consistent, but includes minor visual or behavioral differences.
> * When adding another screenshot would be redundant or distracting.
> 
> **Best practices**:
> * Keep notes concise, ideally one sentence.
> * Place the note directly after the screenshot.
> * Use an `applies_to` badge at the start of the note if relevant.
> 
> **Example**: As of the Elastic Stack 9.1.0 release, there are no examples of this approach being used in live docs
> except for with images used in workflows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Screenshots vary [screenshot]

Sometimes the UI differs between versions, deployment types or other conditions.

### Solution A: Use tabs [screenshot-tabs]

**When to use tabs**:
* When the screenshot shows significantly different interfaces or workflows for each product, deployment type, or version.
* When the screenshot represents a specific, interactive action, like clicking a button or navigating a UI that changes meaningfully between contexts.

**Best practices**:
* Keep any explanatory text outside the tab unless it's specific to the screenshot inside.

**Example**: As of the Elastic Stack 9.1.0 release, there are no examples of this approach being used in live docs
except for with images used in workflows.

### Solution B: Add a note [screenshot-note]

In cases where only a small visual detail differs (for example, a button label or icon), it’s often more efficient to add a note rather than creating tabbed screenshots.

**When to use a note**:
* When the screenshot is mostly consistent, but includes minor visual or behavioral differences.
* When adding another screenshot would be redundant or distracting.

**Best practices**:
* Keep notes concise, ideally one sentence.
* Place the note directly after the screenshot.
* Use an `applies_to` badge at the start of the note if relevant.

**Example**: As of the Elastic Stack 9.1.0 release, there are no examples of this approach being used in live docs
except for with images used in workflows.

### Solution C: Keep the screenshot aligned with the latest version [screenshot-latest]

In cases where the screenshot is rather conceptually demonstrating a capability, it's fine not to version it.

For example, versioning the screenshot on the [Dashboards](https://www.elastic.co/docs/explore-analyze/dashboards) parent page would not add tremendous value unless the capability drastically evolves.
```
I think there's a 3rd case that would work in many scenarios and would help keep this simpler than other options.

:alt:
:::
::::
::::{tab-item} Code
````
---
applies_to:
  stack: ga
  serverless: ga
---

# Spaces

[...]

## Configure a space-level landing page [space-landing-page]

```{applies_to}
stack: ga
serverless: unavailable
```
````
::::
:::::

:::{tip}
Likewise, when the difference is specific to just one paragraph or list item, the same rules apply.
Just the syntax slightly differs so that it stays inline: `` {applies_to}`serverless: unavailable` ``.
:::

## Functionality is added to an unversioned product [unversioned-added]

When functionality is _first added_ to an unversioned product/deployment mode,
how it is labeled depends on if the functionality is in technical preview, beta, or GA.

### If the section lifecycle is the same as the page level [unversioned-added-same]

For example, on the [Project settings](https://www.elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/project-settings#obs-serverless-project-features) page we added content about the Observability Logs Essentials feature tier, that was added to Serverless in GA.
Since the page's frontmatter already includes `serverless: ga`, there is no need to label the added content.

% FOR THE REVIEWER: IS THIS TRUE?

> ::::::{important}

Reviewer: would consider pulling this out of a note so it's all just together as guidance

However, if the functionality is also applicable to a specific version of a versioned product/deployment mode,
label the content with both versioned and unversioned applicability information.

For example, on the [Lens](https://www.elastic.co/docs/explore-analyze/visualize/lens) page we added information
about a new option that was added to Serverless in GA and the Elastic Stack in GA in 9.1.0.
Even though it is added to Serverless, an unversioned product, in the same lifecycle state as the page-level annotation,

> we still include an inline annotation to make it clear that this is not only available in the Elastic Stack.

Reviewer: I don't think we should do this. my biggest reason is dev contributors. they have tunnel vision for the change they're making, and serverless is often inconsequential to them. we should only need them to put the relevant stack label. 

if we need both labels to show, we should do it with code logic.

  Do _not_ list both lifecycles.

:::::{tab-set}
::::{tab-item} Image
:::{image} ./images/example-lifecycle-changed.png
:screenshot:
:alt:
:::
::::
::::{tab-item} Code
````
---
applies_to:
  stack: ga
  serverless: ga
---

# Lens [lens]

[...]

### Assign colors to terms [assign-colors-to-terms]

```{applies_to}
stack: ga 9.1, preview 9.0,
serverless: ga
```

[...]

````
::::
:::::

## Functionality is removed [removed]

When the functionality described in any level of content is removed,
how to handle it varies by whether the product/deployment mode is versioned or unversioned.

For example, we removed the `securitySolution:enableVisualizationsInFlyout` setting that was described on the
[Configure advanced settings](https://www.elastic.co/docs/solutions/security/get-started/configure-advanced-settings)
page from the Elastic Stack in 9.1.0 and from Serverless around the same time.
Since this this functionality is still available before 9.1.0, we need that content to continue to be
available to users on Elastic Stack earlier versions while communicating to users on newer versions

> that it is no longer available.

Reviewer: could link down to exceptions for tech preview/beta functionality here

Author: I rearranged some things in https://github.com/elastic/docs-builder/pull/1614/commits/a2c5e6ecede20691791acbde7cd2e66aa72be455 to group all the information about tagging content for removed functionality in one place: [preview](https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/docs-builder/pull/1614/contribute/cumulative-docs/example-scenarios#removed).

:::::{tab-set}
::::{tab-item} Image
:::{image} ./images/example-removed-unversioned-exception.png
:screenshot:
:alt:
:::
::::
::::{tab-item} Code
````
---
applies_to:
  stack: all
  serverless:
    security: all
---

# Configure advanced settings [security-advanced-settings]

[...]

## Access the event analyzer and Session View from the event or alert details flyout [visualizations-in-flyout]

```{applies_to}
stack: removed 9.1
serverless: removed
```

[...]
````
::::
:::::

::::::{important}
If the functionality was only ever available in an unversioned product or deployment mode,
remove the content altogether.

% FOR THE REVIEWER: IS THERE AN EXAMPLE?
% I couldn't find an actual example of this scenario.
% For example, we removed the <something> functionality that was described on the [<page>](#) page
% from the Elastic Stack in 9.1.0.

> % Since this this functionality is still available in 9.0.0, we need that content to continue to be

Reviewer: something "no longer true" sticking around is used on the `write` thread pool here. excuse the fucked up formatting

https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference/thread-pool-settings

There are a couple possible solutions.

### Solution A: Use a code callout [code-block-callout]

Using a code callout is the lightest-touch solution, but might not be sufficient in all cases.

**When to use a code callout**:

* The code block and its callouts fit vertically on a typical laptop screen.
  This will reduce the risk of users copying the code snippet without reading the information in the callout.
* Syntax is either just added or just removed — syntax is not modified.
  It is difficult to communicate that some syntax is needed in more than one situation but varies depending on the situation.
* The code block will not require more than 3 `applies_to`-related callouts.
  At that point, the code becomes more difficult to read and use.

**Best practices**:

* Place the badge at the beginning of the callout.

**Example**: On the [Entity Analytics](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/beats/filebeat/filebeat-input-entity-analytics#_configuration_3) page, we added a new option to a code block that was only made available in 9.1.0.

::::{image} ./images/example-code-block-callout.png
:screenshot:

> ::::

Reviewer: the ideal scenario is `[feature] was introduced in [version]`

but our inline badges look terrible in sentences ... 

but the takeway is that I don't think the current recommended prose is clear
